Macrophages and dendritic cells play a key role in
activating the adaptive immune system. We have just seen how the adaptive immune system uses antigens
to distinguish between self and nonself, and how it uses
 clonal selection to produce large numbers of specific B and T
cells. In Concepts 39.4 and 39.5 we will focus on how these
cells function to eliminate specific pathogens from the body.
But how is the adaptive immune system activated in the first
place?
One mechanism for eliminating pathogens in the innate immune
system is phagocytosis. After ingestion of a pathogenic
organism or infected host cell, phagocytic cells display fragments
of the pathogen on their cell surfaces. These fragments
function as antigens, and antigen presentation is one way that
components of the innate immune system communicate with
the adaptive immune system. Macrophages and dendritic cells
play a key role in activating the adaptive immune system. After
engulfing pathogens or infected host cells, these cells migrate
to lymph nodes, where they present antigen to immature T
cells. In addition, the antigen-presenting cells secrete cytokines
and other signals that stimulate the activation and differentiation
of the T cells.
Two types of adaptive immune responses interact
The adaptive immune system mounts two types of responses
against invaders: the humoral immune response and the cellular
immune response. These two responses work simultaneously
and cooperatively, sharing many mechanisms. We will use
the example of a viral infection in an overview of these two types
of responses (FIGURE 39.7). These responses also occur when
bacteria or other pathogens infect and grow inside host cells.
B cells that make antibodies are the workhorses of the humoral
immune response, and cytotoxic T (TC) cells are the
workhorses of the cellular immune response. There are three
phases in both types of immune response:
• Recognition phase: In both cellular and humoral immunity,
recognition occurs when an antigen is inserted into the cell
membrane of an antigen-presenting cell, with the unique
antigen structure protruding from the cell membrane. In
addition to dendritic cells and macrophages, developing
B cells can also perform phagocytosis and function as
antigen-presenting cells. Figure 39.7 shows a virus-infected
host cell being engulfed by an antigen-presenting cell; in
other cases, the free viral particles may be engulfed. The
antigen on the surface of the antigen-presenting cell is recognized
by a T-helper (TH) cell bearing a T cell receptor
protein that is specific for the antigen. In both humoral and
cellular immunity, binding initiates the activation phase.
• Activation phase: When the TH cell recognizes an antigen on
an antigen-presenting cell, it propagates and releases cytokines
that stimulate B cells and TC cells bearing receptors